The project
---------------
We are in the development phase of a highly serviceable and maintainable O2 concentrator that is built from standard, readily available components. 

Most replacement parts can be sourced from multiple vendors and local hardware outlets. For example, the columns are made from tri-clamp "sanitary" fittings and filter housings, and copper tubing with standard flare fittings. The unit is bult on a standard 19 inch electronics rack with drilled aluminum panels that provide all of the mounting affordances. All of the fabricated parts are made from common stock using a 2 axis machine or drill press and very little wastage.

These units will be industrial quality and meant to provide decades of reliable service. They will have no foam, adhesives, or other degradable materials used in the construction.

The design targets are 94% O2, 10 l/min with Na-X zeolite and 20 l/min with Li-X zeolite. The columns are 3" x 24" and hold approximately 2.5 kg of media each. The pump supplies up to 200 l/min air volume. The system includes a 2-column silica-based TSA dessicator for the suppy air, which is regenerated by heating the N2 discharged from the O2 sieve side.

The unit pictured is the research unit and has many extra instrumentation and control points for tuning the system. The PLC at the top has Arduino-based modules and a Raspberry Pi "brain". We expect to complete the assembly and start testing in a few weeks. Production units will have a shorter rack and simpler layout with fewer connections.

Future Plans
-----------------
If all goes well, we expect to publish an entire design and manufacturing package under open source licenses, including CAD files and microcomputer code, to enable anyone to build and sell them. 

Our local manufacturing plans are to create a community based SME business start up, and manufacture some version of this for institutional medical use. We expect to see an increase in supplemental oxygen needed for long term care facilities due to COVID-19 and emerging variants, and we want to provide a high quality system for small and medium size facilities. 

Ultimately we envision a modular unit that can be scaled up by adding more modules, with central control and assisted diagnostics with an internet service. There will be no on-site expertise needed except changing air filters.

As we scale up, we may offer to purchase the Lithium Zeolite beads in quantity, and distribute to smaller regional manufacturers. It would be great to establish a reliable source for lithium zeolite media.

About me
------------
I am an engineer with 40 years experience designing industrial controls and instrumentation, computer architecture, and internet technology. I developed this project in my home lab during the quarantine time, to address the long term needs of people that get COVID. I am working mostly on my own with help from some others who have expertise in specialized areas.

Summary
---------------------------------
I am in the final stages of a prototype medical/industrial O2 concentrator for up to 20 l/min at 95%+ (photos attached)

This is a project I started during the pandemic in my home lab/workshop, and I see an opportunity to take it a little further.

The main idea is a highly serviceable and modular unit, built from commonly available and simple parts. It's built on a standard 19" equipment rack. There is no foam or any other degradable material in the construction. It should last 50 years or longer. There is a 2-column silica based air drier on one side with TSA regeneration, to provide extremely dry air to the PSA colums on the other side. 

I am experimenting with using the blowdown gas from the PSA columns to regenerate the silica columns through heating and advection. This will boost the O2 recovery ratio and reduce the size of the air pump needed. I'm hoping to use the 400 watt pump I currently have in the system pictured. A system this size typically uses a >1000 watt pump.

I am also experimenting with a single column VPSA design that is not as far along.

The controls use Arduino microcontrollers and Raspberry Pi as the brain, and can be connected to your LAN. There are extra diagnostic points that enable the system to be administered remotely and run without any specially trained staff on-site. Only periodic filter changes are needed. They can be ganged together to scale up and provide fault-tolerant non-stop service.

I will publish all of the the design files in open source format, anyone can build and sell, royalty-free. I hope others will see opportunity to start up small scale operations to build and deliver these. We expect an increase in global demand for this equipment due to COVID and long-term effects, and want to provide a way to scale up rapidly.

One of the limiting factors in scaling this up is availability of 13X Zeolite in the right mesh size and chemical treatment for efficient operation. I would like to use 0.4-0.8mm bead size Lithium Zeolite in the prototype to get an idea of the best-case recovery ratio and O2 delivery volume.
